feat: Toggle ingress for TF products (#244)
canonical/observability-stack: docs/how-to/install-and-upgrade/configure-granular-ingress.md

---
myst:
 html_meta:
   description: "Enable ingress in COS and COS Lite - configure external access to Observability Stack components using Traefik as the ingress controller."
---

> # Traefik ingress in COS

Reviewer: This is general feedback that relates to all your docs actually, but the How-to guides should have a clearer "How to..." title. It makes it easier for a user landing on the page to understand its purpose (especially if they didn't get to the doc from the sidebar - either bookmark linked, from Google, a LLM, ...).

So then this would be "How to configure Traefik ingress in COS"

Just a suggestion for now. Ideally they'd all be changed, so either update here or defer the work and do them all at the same time

```{Note}
This feature is not available in track/2, only later versions have this ability
```

> Both COS and COS Lite, have the ability to toggle Traefik ingress for some of their internal components. Using the following Terraform root module, you can control `ingress`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both COS and COS Lite allow you to enable or disable Traefik ingress for certain internal components. This configuration [determines what?]

Using the following Terraform root module, you can control `ingress`:
```
I've added some wording changes for clarity, but also - what does toggling this do? That's what the placeholder is for in my suggestion. It can probably be done in 1 sentence, although I'm not sure what the config is for so I wasn't sure what to suggest, e.g., "This determines which components have traffic routed through Traefik" (or whatever)

The format I'm going for here is more like: (1) we have this feature, (2) this is what it is, (3) here's how you use it

```{mermaid}
%%{init: { "theme": "dark" } }%%
flowchart LR
  user([External traffic])

  subgraph COS [cos-model]
    traefik[traefik]
    grafana[grafana]
    alertmanager[alertmanager]
    catalogue[catalogue]
    loki[loki]
    prometheus[prometheus]
  end

  user --> traefik
  traefik -->|"ingress = true"| grafana
  traefik -. "ingress = false" .-> alertmanager
  traefik -. "ingress = false" .-> catalogue
  traefik -. "ingress = false" .-> loki
  traefik -. "ingress = false" .-> prometheus

  classDef Charm stroke:white,stroke-width:1px,color:white,rx:8px,ry:8px
  classDef Disabled stroke:#666,stroke-width:1px,color:#aaa,rx:8px,ry:8px
  class traefik,grafana,user Charm
  class alertmanager,catalogue,loki,prometheus Disabled
```

```{Note}
If you are using COS Lite, create a cos-lite module with the cos-lite source: [`git::https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack//terraform/cos-lite`](https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack/tree/main/terraform/cos-lite).

The [COS Lite bundle](https://charmhub.io/cos-lite) is now deprecated in favor of Terraform modules.

> ```

Reviewer: There isn't clearly an instruction here - you note that they can use the TF module up front, but that guidance and the resolution here is interrupted by a diagram and a note, so it's easy to pass over it and not connect what's happening here.

I'd suggest adding a heading here (e.g., "Configure the Terraform module"), with brief instructions at the top so it's clearer, something like:

## Configure the Terraform module

Using the following Terraform module, set your ingress options to enable or disable how each component should route traffic.

(then continue on - provide the TF module, noting what true/false are, and if any more steps are needed to apply the changes)

```{literalinclude} /how-to/install-and-upgrade/cos-ingress.tf

> ```

Reviewer: It's not clear to me what `true` and `false` entail here - is this something "obvious" to your users? I think it'd be helpful to clarify what each T/F actually mean. Not in the `include` block, but you could add it as a line before or after

> ```

Reviewer: Also - are there any steps needed to apply the changes (e.g., a restart)? I'm not that familiar with Terraform - just trying to think of the user flow through a how-to. So they've got the TF module, edited it, now what?
